---
aliases: Introduction
subject: Numerical Methods for Dynamical Systems
lecturer: Mercè Ollé Torner
format: in-person
program: Master in Advanced Mathematics and Mathematical Engineering
dates: 13-09-2022
tags: #mamme #numericalmethods #dynamicalsystems
---
# Introduction
## Concepts
The dynamical systems concept is a mathematical formalization for "any given rule" that describes the time dependence of a point's position in the [[Ambient Space|ambient space]], that is, *dynamical systems provide a way of modelling events that change over time*.

So we try to model an event with a system of mathematical equations that can be used for prediction.

>What type of dynamical systems will be study? In theory, any problem. We will consider problems in mechanics, biology, economy, medicine, neuroscience, chemistry, celestial mechanics, astrodynamics.

>Typically, we'd like to know the analytical solution of the full set. But most times, we will not be able to find the analytic expression of the whole set of solutions. What we will do?
 1. If we can use analytical tools, great
 >2. We can complement them with numerical methods.

###### Goal
Given a problem (model) and a system of mathematical equations, we want to find the *whole set of solutions*. 
1. We would like to have an analytical expression of the solutions.
2. We will apply numerical methods.

In particular, we will focus on *systems of ordinary differential equations, ODEs*.

## Contents of the course
1. Numerical tools / methods to describe the behavior of the *(some)* solutions of a given dynamical system: equilibrium points, periodic orbits, stability, invariant manifolds, persistence of solutions, bifurcations

## Organization of the course
1. Theoretical session (Room 102)
2. Session at the PC4 room

## Grading system
- Class attendance is compulsory
- Assignments: 65%
- 2 short exams: 35%

## References
1. *Dynamical systems and numerical analysis.* A.M. Stuart, A.R. Humphries
2. *Nonlinear dynamics and chaos*. S. H. Strogatz
3. *An introduction to dynamical systems*, D. K. Arrowsmith, C. M. Place
4. *Introduction to Hamiltonian dynamical systems and the N-body problem*. K. Meyer, G. Hall
and published papers

### Website
https://mat-web.upc.edu/fme/nmds
Atenea

## Consultation
By sending an email
merce.olle@upc.edu

## Software
Use any software we want. We need to work with, at least, double presition. We need a numerical integrator to solve ODEs. 

It's not asked for us to write an integrator. We can take an integrator as a black box, like *ode45* from Matlab.